Welcome back. Now
that we've discussed
the basic hardware
and software
that we'll need
for localization,
let's put everything
together.
In this lesson,
we will derive
an error state extended
Kalman Filter that
estimates position,
velocity,
and orientation of
a self-driving car
using an IMU,
a GNSS receiver,
and a LIDAR.
Although we'll make
some simplifications,
the basic structure
of our pipeline will
resemble one used in
modern self-driving
vehicles.
Before we dive into
the algorithm details,
it's always useful
to take a step
back and ask, "Why
use these sensors and
can we do something
more simple?"
In our case, we'll
be using an IMU with
a GNSS receiver and
a LIDAR for
several reasons.
First, whenever we fuse
information for
the purpose
of state estimation,
one important factor
to consider is
whether or not the
errors from
different sensors
will be correlated.
In other words,
if one fails is
the other likely
to fail as well.
In this case, all three
of our sensors use
different measurement
methods and are
unlikely to fail for
the same reason.
Second, we should
try our best to
choose sensors that are
complimentary in nature.
In our case,
the IMU acts as
a high-rate
smoother of GPS
or GNSS position
estimates.
GNSS data can mitigate
errors that are
due to IMU drift.
It's also possible to use
wheel odometry
for this purpose.
In this lecture,
we'll stick to
IMUs as they can provide
full position
and orientation
information in
three-dimensions,
whereas wheel odometry is
limited to two dimensions.
Finally, LIDAR
can compliment
GNSS information
by providing
very accurate position
estimates within
a known map and
in sky obstructed
locations.
Conversely, GNSS can tell
LIDAR which map to
use when localizing.
For the purposes of
EKF state estimation,
we can implement either
what's called a loosely
coupled estimator or a
tightly coupled one.
In a tightly coupled EKF,
we use the raw pseudo
range and point cloud
measurements from
our GNSS and LIDAR
as observations.
In a loosely
coupled system,
we assume that this data
has already been
preprocessed to
produce a noisy
position estimate.
Although the tightly
coupled approach can
lead to more accurate
localization,
it's often tedious
to implement
and requires
a lot of tuning.
For this reason,
we'll implement
a loosely coupled
EKF here.
Here you can
see a graphical
representation
of our system.
We'll use the IMU
measurements as
noisy inputs to
our motion model.
This will give us
our predicted state
which will
update every time we
have an IMU measurement,
this can happen hundreds
of times a second.
At a much slower rate,
we'll incorporate GNSS
and LIDAR measurements
whenever they
become available,
say once a second
or slower,
and use them to
correct our
predicted state.
So, what is our state?
For our purposes,
we'll use a ten-dimensional
state vector
that includes
a 3D position,
a 3D velocity,
any 4D unit
quaternion that will
represent
the orientation of
our vehicle with respect
to a navigation frame.
We'll assume
that IMU outputs
specific forces and
rotational rates in
the sensor frame
and combine them
into a single
input vector u.
It's also important to
point out that
we're not going
to track accelerometer
or gyroscope biases.
These are often put
into the state vector,
estimated, and
then subtracted
off of the our IMU
measurements.
For clarity, we'll
emit them here
and assume
our IMU measurements
are unbiased.
Our motion model
for the position,
velocity,
and orientation
will integrate
the proper
accelerations and
rotational rates
from our IMU.
The position updates
look like this.
Next is the
velocity update,
and finally,
the quaternion update.
We'll need to use
a bunch of definitions
as shown below.
Remember that
our quaternion
will keep track of
the orientation
of our sensor frame S
with respect to
our navigation frame
n. Because of the
orientation parameters,
which we express as
a rotation matrix,
our motion model
is not linear.
To use it in our EKF,
we'll need to linearize
it with respect to
some small error or
perturbation about
the predicted state.
To do this, we'll define
an error state that
consists of Delta P,
Delta V, and
Delta phi where
Delta phi is a three
by one orientation error.
Using this state,
we can derive
aerodynamics with the
appropriate Jacobians.
For our measurement model,
we'll use a very
simple observation of
the position plus
some additive
Gaussian noise.
We'll define
a covariance R sub GNSS,
for the GNSS
position noise,
and R sub LIDAR,
for our LIDAR position
measurement noise.
It's important here
to note that we have
assumed that our LIDAR and
GNSS will supply
position measurements
in the same
coordinate frame.
In a realistic
implementation,
the GNSS position
estimates
may serve as a way to
select a known map
against which
the LIDAR data
can then be compared.
With these
definitions in mind,
we can now describe
our extended
Kalman filter.
Our filter will loop every
time an IMU
measurement occurs.
We'll first use the
motion model to predict
a new state based
on our last state.
The last state may be
a fully corrected state
or one that was
also propagated
using the motion
model only
depending on
whether or not we
received a GNSS or
LIDAR measurement
at the last time step.
Next, we'll propagate
the state uncertainty
through our linearized
motion model.
Again, accounting
for whether or not
our previous state was
corrected or uncorrected.
At this point,
if we don't have
any GNSS or LIDAR
measurements available,
we can repeat
steps one and two.
If we do, we'll
first compute
the Kalman gain
that is appropriate
for the given observation,
we'll then compute
an error state that we
will use to correct
our predicted state.
This error state
is based on
the product of
the Kalman gain and
the difference between the
predicted and
observed position.
We will then correct
our predicted state
using our error state.
This correction is
straightforward
for position and velocity,
but some more
complicated algebra is
required to correct
the quaternion.
We'll need
this special update
because the quaternion is
a constrained
quantity that
is not a simple vector.
Finally, we'll update
our state covariants
in the usual way.
That's it. There
you have it.
Your very own
localization pipeline.
If you followed everything
up until now,
congratulations!
You're well on your way to
becoming a
localization guru.
Before we end this lesson,
let's review a few of
the assumptions we've
made when putting
our pipeline together.
We used a loosely-coupled
extended Kalman
Filter framework
to fuse inertial
measurements
from an IMU together with
position measurements
from a GNSS
receiver and LIDAR.
We assume that the GNSS
and LIDAR provided us with
position estimates in
the same coordinate frame
which requires
some preprocessing,
but is possible to do
in a realistic
implementation.
Second, we did
not account for
accelerometer or
gyroscope biases
in our IMU measurements.
This simplified
our algebra
but is not a
realistic assumption.
Luckily, if you follow
along with what
we've done here,
adding biases is not
insignificant leap.
Next, we didn't discuss
Filter State
initialization.
This is often taken to
be some known state
at the start of
the localization process.
Finally, we also
assumed that our
sensors were
all spatially and
temporally aligned.
We assumed that
our sensors were
calibrated in the sense
that we didn't
worry about varying time
steps or how we can get
several sets of
measurements all
aligned into
one coordinate frame.
Performing
this latter step is
a very important part of
constructing an accurate
localization pipeline.
We'll discuss it next.